cts rules to ordering a sequence of geologic events"],"model":"In an undeformed sequence, superposition puts older beds below younger beds. Original horizontality says sedimentary/volcanic layers were deposited approximately parallel to Earth’s surface, so tilted beds must have been deformed later. Lateral continuity lets us correlate separated pieces of a once-continuous layer. Cross-cutting says a fault, dike, or erosional surface is younger than what it cuts. Together these relationships let us order deposition, deformation, intrusion/faulting, erosion, and later deposition."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"Differentiate a nonconformity, angular unconformity, and disconformity, and explain what all unconformities have in common.","points":["Nonconformity: sedimentary/layered rocks over igneous or metamorphic rocks","Angular unconformity: younger beds over tilted/deformed older beds","Disconformity: parallel sedimentary beds with missing section/time","All mark erosion and/or non-deposition and missing geologic time"],"model":"A nonconformity places layered rocks on eroded plutonic/metamorphic basement. An angular unconformity places younger beds across tilted/deformed older strata. A disconformity has sedimentary layers above and below that remain roughly parallel, but some section/time is missing. All are surfaces representing erosion, uplift and/or non-deposition and therefore missing time."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"How can fossils and sedimentary features be combined to reconstruct an ancient depositional environment?","points":["Fossils provide biological/environmental clues","Rock type/grain size/sorting/roundness provide energy/transport clues","Sedimentary structures provide process clues","Vertical changes can record shoreline transgression/regression"],"model":"Fossils indicate the organisms and environmental conditions present and can also constrain age. Grain size, sorting, roundness, rock type, and sedimentary structures indicate transport energy and depositional process. Combining those lines of evidence lets geologists infer settings such as rivers, coastal sands, marine muds, or limestone environments. Changes upward through a section can record transgression or regression."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"Why are unconformities as important as the rocks themselves in reconstructing geologic history?","points":["They represent missing time","They can record erosion/uplift/non-deposition","They separate episodes of deposition/tectonism","Ignoring them makes a sequence appear more continuous than it was"],"model":"Unconformities are surfaces that mark intervals of erosion, uplift, and non-deposition. Those intervals may represent enormous amounts of time, so the gap can be as important as the preserved rock. Recognizing unconformities separates distinct episodes in the history and prevents us from assuming the rock record is continuous."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"Explain the difference between directional, episodic, and cyclic changes in Earth history. Give one slide example of each.","points":["Directional = non-repeatable trend","Episodic = discrete event","Cyclic = repeating pattern","One correct example of each from slides"],"model":"Directional change is a one-way, non-repeatable trend such as long-term cooling, atmospheric change, slowing rotation, or evolution. Episodic change is a discrete event such as an impact, eruption, or extinction. Cyclic change repeats, such as glaciations, sea-level change, or magnetic reversals."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"Reconstruct the broad Grand Canyon history emphasized in the lecture slides.","points":["Ancient basement/Yavapai orogeny","Erosion and later Grand Canyon Supergroup deposition","Rodinian/Grenville-related events/rifting","Sauk transgression and Paleozoic deposition","Laramide uplift and later canyon erosion"],"model":"The oldest basement formed/metamorphosed during the Yavapai orogeny, followed by erosion. Younger Precambrian units of the Grand Canyon Supergroup record later deposition and tectonism tied to Grenville/Rodinia events and rifting. The Sauk transgression brought Cambrian seas and Paleozoic deposition. Later Laramide uplift raised the region, and much later erosion carved the modern Grand Canyon."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"What is structural geology and what kinds of evidence does it use to infer tectonic forces?","points":["Defines structural geology as analysis of deformation","Mentions folds","Mentions faults","Mentions fabrics/foliation","Connects structures to forces/tectonic processes"],"model":"Structural geology analyzes deformation recorded in rocks. Folds, faults, and metamorphic fabrics such as foliation record strain and deformation. Their geometry and orientation can be used to infer the forces that acted and the tectonic processes responsible."},{"topic":"Ch 1","q":"Explain the difference between Ma and m.y. and why geologists need large time units.","points":["Ma = millions of years ago","m.y. = duration/interval in millions of years","Geologic processes often operate slowly","Effects accumulate over enormous spans"],"model":"Ma is an age measured in millions of years ago, whereas m.y. is an interval lasting millions of years. Many geologic processes proceed at very slow rates compared with human lifetimes, so large time units are needed to describe when events happened and how long processes operated."},{"topic":"Ch 2","q":"Why are fossils useful for both correlation and relative dating, and what makes an index fossil especially useful?","points":["Extinct species do not reappear","Fossils can correlate distant outcrops","Fossils constrain relative age","Index fossil: wide distribution","Index fossil: high tolerance/rapid evolution/distinct morphology"],"model":"Because extinct species do not reappear, their presence can be a time marker. Matching fossil assemblages allow distant outcrops to be correlated and relatively dated. An especially useful index fossil is widespread, ecologically tolerant, evolves rapidly so it has a short time range, and is morphologically distinctive."},{"topic":"Ch 2","q":"Compare catastrophism, uniformitarianism, actualism, and gradualism as presented in the slides.","points":["Catastrophism emphasizes major catastrophic changes","Uniformitarianism: present is key to past","Actualism: natural laws/processes remain applicable","Gradualism: rates/intensities assumed similar/slow","Explains actualism does not require gradualism"],"model":"Catastrophism emphasizes large, abrupt events. Uniformitarianism is summarized as the present being the key to the past. Actualism means past events are interpreted using the same natural laws and physical processes we can observe today. Gradualism is the stronger claim that rates/intensities are roughly uniform and slow. The slides warn that actualism is useful but strict gradualism can fail."},{"topic":"Ch 2","q":"Why were Neptunism and Plutonism both important even though neither alone explains all rocks?","points":["Neptunism = universal-ocean origin","Plutonism = molten/internal-heat origin","Each tried to explain local observations with global causes","Modern geology recognizes multiple rock-forming processes"],"model":"Neptunism attributed rocks to precipitation from a universal ocean, while Plutonism emphasized molten material and internal heat. Their importance was conceptual: both tried to explain local rock observations using global Earth processes. Modern geology recognizes that sedimentary and igneous processes both operate."},{"topic":"Ch 2","q":"Use the Channeled Scablands example to explain why strict gradualism can be misleading.","points":["Bretz argued landforms required huge floods","Idea resisted because catastrophism had been rejected","Pardee/other evidence supported giant floods","Rare high-magnitude events can coexist with actualism"],"model":"Bretz argued the eastern Washington landforms could not have formed by ordinary gradual processes and required giant floods. Because catastrophism had been rejected, the interpretation was resisted. Later evidence, including Pardee’s work, supported catastrophic flooding. The lesson is that the same physical laws operate, but rates and magnitudes do not have to be uniform or slow."},{"topic":"Ch 2","q":"Describe the scientific method emphasized in the lecture and explain what makes a hypothesis scientific.","points":["Observation","Hypothesis/explanation makes predictions","New observations/experiments test predictions","Results compared with predictions","Hypothesis must be capable of being wrong/falsified"],"model":"The lecture sequence is observation → propose an explanation/hypothesis that predicts other observations or experimental outcomes → make new observations/experiments → compare results with predictions and revise/reject if needed. A scientific hypothesis must expose itself to possible failure: “How will I know if I’m wrong?”"},{"topic":"Ch 2","q":"What did William Smith contribute to geology and how did his work connect fossils to strata?","points":["First geologic map","Recognized regular order of fossil occurrence","Linked specific fossils to specific strata","Enabled correlation/relative dating"],"model":"William “Strata” Smith produced the first geologic map and recognized that fossils occur in a consistent order, with particular fossil assemblages tied to particular strata. That insight made it possible to correlate rock layers and establish relative ages over large areas."},{"topic":"Ch 3","q":"Explain the chain from the Big Bang to the heavy elements found in Earth.","points":["Big Bang ~13.77 Ga","Gravity concentrated matter into galaxies/stars","Stars fuse lighter elements","Heavy elements produced through stellar evolution","Heavier-than-iron elements associated with giant-star collapse/supernova dispersal"],"model":"The universe began with the Big Bang about 13.77 billion years ago. Unevenly distributed matter was concentrated by gravity into galaxies and stars. Fusion in stars produced heavier elements from lighter ones. During the collapse/explosion of massive stars, elements heavier than iron formed and were dispersed, supplying later solar systems with heavy elements such as Fe and Si."},{"topic":"Ch 3","q":"Explain planetary differentiation and how seismic waves reveal Earth’s layered interior.","points":["Dense metallic melt moved inward","Lighter silicate material moved outward","Core vs mantle/crust distinction","Seismic waves travel differently through materials","S waves cannot travel through liquids → liquid outer core"],"model":"Early heating allowed chemical/physical differentiation: dense iron-rich metallic melt moved inward to form the core while lighter silicate material moved upward to mantle and crust. Earthquake seismic waves change speed/path through different materials. Because S waves cannot travel through liquids, their behavior helps show that the outer core is liquid."},{"topic":"Ch 3","q":"What is isostasy and how does it explain the elevation contrast between continents and oceans?","points":["Crust has lower density than asthenosphere","Crust “floats” gravitationally","Thicker/lower-density crust stands higher","Links to continents high/oceans low"],"model":"Isostasy is the gravitational balance in which lower-density crust floats on the asthenosphere. Thick or relatively low-density continental crust rides higher, while thinner/denser oceanic lithosphere sits lower. This helps explain high continents and deep ocean basins."},{"topic":"Ch 3","q":"Use 40Ar, 3He, and Xe evidence to explain the lecture’s conclusion about the timing of Earth’s outgassing.","points":["40Ar comes from 40K decay and abundant atmospheric 40Ar argues against all gas being lost at t=0","3He is primordial and present in mantle → original gas remains","Xe ratios record significant early outgassing","Final conclusion: major early outgassing but incomplete; outgassing continued"],"model":"Most atmospheric Ar is 40Ar produced by 40K decay, so if Earth had completely degassed only in one early event there would not be so much later-produced 40Ar in the atmosphere. Mantle 3He is primordial, so some original gas remains inside Earth. Xe isotope ratios indicate substantial degassing occurred early. Together the slides conclude Earth experienced major early outgassing but did not completely degas at t=0 and continued to lose gas later."},{"topic":"Ch 3","q":"Describe the origin and composition of Earth’s early atmosphere and oceans as presented in the slides.","points":["Atmospheric gases largely from mantle/outgassing","Early atmosphere rich in N2/CO2/H2O and other volcanic gases","Not suited for modern oxygen-breathing life","Oxygen later attributed to photosynthesis","Ocean water mostly from mantle outgassing, some comet contribution","Salts from weathering/rivers"],"model":"Cooling magmas and mantle outgassing supplied much of the early atmosphere, including N₂, CO₂, H₂O and other gases. It was not an oxygen-rich atmosphere suitable for modern animals; the slides attribute later oxygen to photosynthesis. Most ocean water likely condensed from water outgassed by the mantle, with some comet input. Weathering supplied dissolved salts carried by rivers."},{"topic":"Ch 3","q":"Why are meteorites central to reconstructing early solar-system history?","points":["Remnants/leftovers from planet formation","Preserve primitive composition","Stony vs iron meteorites resemble different planetary components","Isotopic ages constrain age of solar system"],"model":"Meteorites are leftover material from solar-system formation. Their mineral/chemical compositions preserve primitive material,